PART I

I
The exiled spirit, Demon banished,
Above the sinful earth once flew,
Remembered better days now vanished
Then crowded in his mind’s eye’s view;
Of days he’d spent in light’s own dwelling
When he had shone, a cherub chaste,
When spark of streaking comet’s swelling
Would greet him with its smile’s brief welling
As through the heavens it had raced,
When through the drifting mists eternal
He’d cast a greedy eye upon
The nomad’s train in wastes infernal
That by the starry void was drawn;
When faith a loving heart did spawn,
The happy firstborn of creation!
He’d no idea of sin’s damnation,
And serried ranks of barren time
Did not exact from conscience duty,
And now too weak was memory’s chime
To summon all that wondrous beauty.

II
And so the outcast wandered long
Through desert world that gave no shelter:
And century followed centuries’ throng
As minute follows minutes’ welter –
And all was marked by passion’s dearth.
And holding sway o’er worthless earth
In sowing sin he found no pleasure
And though he tried with all his skill
He found that no one had his measure
And evil was but tedious drill.

III
Above Caucasian lofty places
The one cast out of heaven flew:
Beneath him Kazbek’s diamond faces
There shone with endless frozen blue,
And far below, all light repelling,
Like crevice made for serpent’s dwelling
Darial a winding pattern drew,
And Terek, like a lion flinging
There frothing with its shaggy mane
Now roared – and beast and eagle winging
In azure height above the chain
Were listening as the water babbled.
And there the clouds in golden strands
From distant unknown southern lands
Were with him as he northwards travelled.
And rocky crags in looming crowd
Were deep in their mysterious dreaming,
And high above him to him bowed
And tracked the waves as they were gleaming;
And castle’s cliff-top towers perched
With menace drifting vapours scanning –
The days the guarding giants searched
As they Caucasian gates were manning!
And round it, wondrous vision wild
Was all God’s world – but scornful, smiled
The haughty spirit, eyes rejecting
Divine creation’s majesty –
His lofty brow no good reflecting,
No hint of gentle amity,

IV
And there before him now was spreading
Another lively, lovely scene:
The Georgian valleys’ grandeur threading
Extended with its glorious mien;
This earth’s redoubt of fertile green!
The pillared-poplars, leaves a-shedding,
And sonorous flowing rivers’ sheen
Along the bed of coloured shingle,
And nightingales from rosebush keen
For unrequited tuneful jingle
Of tender-noted lover’s preen;
The plane trees’ verdant leafy bower,
With crown of ivy, dense deceit,
The caves, where in the scorching heat,
The timid deer from sun’s rays cower;
And lustre, life, and rustling leaves,
The hundred voices ear perceives,
And thousand flowers’ wafting power!
Voluptuous warmth of midday sun
And aromatic dewy stun
That always comes when night is falling,
And brilliant stars, like eyes, recalling
A glance from Georgian maiden won!
However, but for envy’s chilling,
There nature’s gleam did not excite
In barren exile’s breast nor spilling
Emotions new, nor increased might;
And all that he to see was fated
By turns the angel loathed or hated.

V
And there was lofty house and yard –
The silver-haired Gudal’s construction…
Its cost in work and tears’ production
Was borne by slaves both long and hard.
Since dawn the shadows’ bars have scarred
The slopes of nearby mountains shaded.
And in the rock some steps are graded;
They lead from perching corner tower
To riverbank, and down it, flitting,
Princess Tamara at this hour,
Her face concealed by white veil fitting,
Aragvi-bound with water jar.

VI
And at the valleys, ever silent,
The clifftop house looked, far from gay;
But there’s a banquet on this day –
The wine is poured, shrieks zurna strident –
For Gudal’s found Tamara’s man,
To daughter’s wedding summoned clan.
And on the roof, with carpets covered,
The bride is sitting ’midst her friends;
With games and songs their leisure ends.
And where the setting sun has hovered
Behind the hills it now descends;
And as they clap with mad pulsation
They sing – and now her tambourine
The bride takes up in her elation.
She lifts her hand – behold the scene! –
Above her head – coquettish preen,
Like flighty bird it, sudden, rushes,
And seems to stop to cast a glance –
Her eyes now sparkle as they dance
Beneath her sultry shadowed lashes;
And beckon eyebrows of the bride
As suddenly she bends a little,
Along the rug with winsome glide
Her foot now wobbles like a skittle;
And now the lovely maiden smiles,
Replete her glance with childlike wiles,
But moonbeam on the condensation
Now shimmers with erratic beat,
And with her smiling’s animation
Nor life, nor youth can scarce compete.

VII
I swear to you by midnight star,
By setting sun and by its rising,
That neither golden Persia’s tsar
Nor earthly king from near or far
Has ever kissed such eye surprising;
And nor has harem’s splashing jet
With dewy opalescent ferment,
Relieving summer’s blazing torment,
Connected with such beauteous set!
And earthly hand of no one ever
Has by caresses’ sweet endeavour
Unplaited tresses so divine;
And such a wondrous beauty’s never –
Since paradise from world did sever –
So bloomed where southern sun did shine.

VIII
And now her final dance gyrated.
Alas! at dawn sad fate awaited
Gudal’s fair daughter, now elated,
Of liberty, vivacious child,
Who would become a bonded vassal
To alien land and unknown castle,
By unfamiliar clan defiled.
And darkened oft by doubt’s inducement
Her face was delicate and light;
And every moment of her movement,
So slender, quite beyond improvement,
Was full of simple, sweet delight,
That should the Demon, in his passing,
Upon her lower then his gaze,
With thoughts of former brethren massing,
He might have sighed and changed his ways…

IX
And Demon saw her… For a moment
Arose in him a strange excitement
That somehow caught him by surprise,
The desert of his silent conscience
Was filled with sound in blissful guise –
Again he stood before the monstrance
Where love, and good and grace are found!
And long did clasp his admiration
This lovely vision – and he found
The chain of former dreams’ elation,
As if a star beyond a star
Now rolled before him from afar.
Enchained by some unseen fixation,
A new distress in him was sown;
And now arose a new sensation
That spoke a language once his own.
A ghost was this regeneration?
The treacherous phrases of temptation
It seemed were absent from his mind…
Oblivion God had not assigned:
Amnesia met his deprecation!

X
Upon exhausted, loyal steed,
To wedding feast now came at speed
The bridegroom in his agitation.
He reached, now filled with love’s elation,
Aragvi’s scintillating banks.
Behind him trails in serried ranks
Weighed down with gifts that they are bringing
Behold! a camel caravan,
Their bells with doleful knell a-ringing,
On road as far as eye can scan.
Lo, this is Sinodal the ruler,
Before rich caravan he goes.
On belt his crafty weapon shows:
His dagger fashioned by a jeweller
In sunlight glinting – and his gun,
Its stock engraved and silver-spun.
And see, the playful wind is blowing
On sleeves of nobleman’s chukha.
It’s lace-lined as if made for shah –
His saddle bright with silken sewing;
His bridle with its tassels flowing;
Beneath him pants his gallant horse
Arrayed in gold upon its course.
Of Karabakh, this hot alumnus
Pricks up his ears in fearful numbness,
And snorting, squints from up on high
As leaping waters now draw nigh.
And dangerous is the road and narrow!
On left the cliffs soar to the sky,
From right comes river’s depth-thrown bellow.
It’s late, and snow on height’s dull yellow
Replaces sunset’s blush; and mist
Now spurs them on towards the tryst.

XI
And by the road is chapel nested…
For years now here in God has rested
Some prince or other, now a saint,
Who lost his life to murderous feint.
And since then weary traveller’s broken
His course to battle or to feast,
And here a fervent prayer has spoken
For God’s protection from the beast;
To many brings this prayer salvation
From Muslim dagger’s penetration.
But dashing groom this custom scorns,
Ancestral ways are choked by thorns –
For by some crafty machination
His thoughts all night the Demon’s tried:
In dark in his imagination
Another’s kissed on lips his bride.
And now two shades appeared with clatter
Of rifle-fire – what was the matter?
And on his stirrups standing now,
His hat pulled down below his brow,
The valiant prince now waited, silent;
In hand he brandished Turkish gun
He cracked his whip, as from the sun
He swooped like eagle, firing, violent.
And wild cry and muted moan
Resounded through the plunging valley –
The battle ended, hero thrown:
And fearful Georgians did not dally!

XII
And all was quiet; crowding round,
Their sometime riders dead on ground,
The camels, horror-struck were gazing;
And muffled came the doleful sound
Of dangling bells in dismal phrasing.
The gorgeous caravan was sacked;
Above those Christian bodies stacked
The bird of night was circles tracing!
For them no peaceful grave embracing
Beneath a consecrated yard,
For them was not their fathers’ guard;
Nor sisters’ nor their mothers’ keeping
Their vigil in their long veils sweeping,
In grieving pleading, sorely weeping,
Attending grave from far away!
But here with willing hand, however,
Above the rocks – a saint’s endeavour –
They will erect a cross one day;
In spring the tumbling ivy ever
Caressing it will coil around
Like fisher’s emerald net ensnaring;
And there from arduous road repairing
Will weary pilgrims oft be found
Where godly shadow strikes the ground…

XIII
As if to battle steed is dashing,
More swift than deer with snorts and crashing;
He comes to standstill with a wheeze,
And pricks his ears towards the breeze,
And paces, panting, nostrils flaring;
Then onwards, seemingly uncaring,
His spark-hooves’ clatter loud resounds,
His tousled mane behind him twisting,
Oblivious, he forwards pounds.
And yet his rider’s grim persisting!
Betimes with switch he feebly swings,
And crouching to steed’s mane he clings.
But he has lost control already,
His stirruped feet are now like lead,
And see! how now in broad stream steady
The blood beneath him oozes red.
O dashing steed, your lord you’ve carried
From battle’s clamour at all speed,
But still the Ossete isn’t parried,
His bullet’s struck – oh dreadful deed!

XIV
At Gudal’s there is grief and moaning,
In yard they crowd and news await:
Whose horse is this that, breathless, groaning,
Has fallen by the craggy gate?
Who is this lifeless rider stretching
With battle’s dread in fearful etching
In swarthy wrinkles of his brow?
His arms and dress – oh, fate romantic! –
Are bloody; clutching, final frantic,
To mane his hand is rigid now.
So ends long wait for her intended,
The vigil kept by anxious bride:
Enflamed by prince’s promise, splendid
That to their wedding feast he’d ride…
Alas! now never will her lover
With dashing horse new joys uncover!

XV
Upon the carefree clan was dropped,
As if a bolt, God’s retribution!
And poor Tamara now was flopped
On bed in weeping destitution;
And, flowing, follows tear on tear,
Her breast is heaving, she is panting;
And now, above her, voice enchanting
The sad Tamara seems to hear:
“My child, don’t cry! in vain your crying!
No matter what, your tear’s applying
Can never be life-giving dew:
To lovely face its clouds supplying
Will only virgin cheeks burn too!
He’s far away, new heights addresses,
He doesn’t understand your pain;
The light of heaven now caresses,
Immortal sight it does detain;
He hears the melodies of heaven…
So what are life’s complacent dreams,
The tears and groans of wretched maiden,
For one whom paradise redeems?
The fate of puny, mortal creatures,
Believe me, angel of the earth,
Should never mar your lovely features –
Such grieving, dear, is nothing worth!
Now aloft in breezy ocean
Rudderless, without a sail,
Float through mist with gentle motion
Angel choirs that spin their tale;
’Midst the heavens’ fields so boundless
Pass through sky without a trace
Woolly flocks, replete, yet soundless,
Of shy clouds in drifting race.
Neither are they joy nor sorrow
Parting’s hour nor fond farewell;
Careless of what brings tomorrow,
On the past they do not dwell.
On the painful day of anguish
You’ll remember them alone;
So, abandon fate and languish
Careless like them, on your own.
As soon as veil of night’s alighted
On grim Caucasian mountain peaks,
As soon as world, by spell delighted,
Enchanted, now no longer speaks;
As soon as rocks are brushed by breezes,
Whose breath the faded grasses teases,
Discloses then a hiding lark
That joyful flutters in the dark;
And underneath the vine’s protection,
Drinks heaven’s dew in fond subjection
The lovely night flower as it blooms;
As soon as golden crescent looms,
From tops of mountains softly rises,
And with its crafty gaze surprises –
To you I shall begin to fly;
Until the morning star I’ll linger
And golden dreams brush with their finger
Your silken lashes as you sigh.”

XVI
Now distant was those words’ conclusion,
As died their echo’s waning sound.
And up she leapt and looked around…
In her arose a strange confusion –
Despair and fear, but also found
Was unknown ardour’s new illusion.
Emotions new her sense had drowned;
And at its chains her soul was tearing,
And flames were coursing through her veins –
And with them, wonderfully flaring,
She thought she heard his words’ refrains.
And welcome sleep before the morning
At last then closed her weary eyes;
But now to her came thought’s surprise
A dream of strange, prophetic warning.
A stranger’s misty, silent shape,
Agleam, and hanging like a drape,
Towards her pillows now was bending;
His gaze was one of love unending,
And yet a sadness seemed to stir,
As if this shadow pitied her.
No angel this of heaven’s places,
no guardian dear of godly graces:
no crown of rainbow’s rays unfurls
to decorate his winsome curls.
To hell was not this wraith’s adherence,
Nor had he wicked martyr’s might!
Like limpid evening his appearance:
Nor day, nor night – nor dark nor light!